# Meeting Reports of the Mathematical-Physical Class of the Royal Bavarian Academy of Sciences in Munich.

## Volume 5. Year 1875.

### Munich.

### 1875.

### In Commission with G. Franz.

### Mr. Carl Wilhelm von Gümbel Gives a Lecture:

#### "On the of Nature of the Stone Meteorites from the Fall of February 12, 1875 in Iowa County North America"

There took place, according to information from John Lawrence Smith,* on February 12th of this year, in Iowa County of North America in the evening around ten-thirty under a slightly cloudy sky, a powerful bang* from a meteor fall visible for miles around, which delivered a large number of stones. Smith reported that by then approximately 150 kilograms of stones had been collected, of which 25 kilograms belonged to Prof. Hinrichs. The academy is in debt to his charitableness, for he donated a splendid part weighing approximately 1,500 grams, which gave rise to the following description on the nature of this highly peculiar meteorite.

The Iowa [Homestead] meteorite belongs to that most commonly occurring class of stones, which one refers to by the name of chondrites, or according to [Gabriel Auguste] Daubrée, in the domain of the sporadosiderite and in the group of the oligosiderite, as Prof. Hinrichs had correctly noted* in his accompanying letter to the Paris Academy, which included a portion of all these meteorites, and corroborated by Daubrée himself.

*) _Comptes rendus d. seance de l'Academie d. sc. à Paris_. T. 80. Nr. 23. 1875. p. 1451.

*) _The Americ. Journ. ob. sc. a arts. f. Dana a. Silliman_. May 1875. Vol. 9. Nr. 53. p. 407.

*) _Comptes rendus d. s. de l'Acad. d. sc_. 1875. p. 1175.

The considerably sharp-edged, acute-angled, unevenly tetrahedral stone is coated all over with a black fusion crust, and inside light grayish white, furnished with abundant small black nodules and granules of meteoritic and sulphuric iron and seemingly scattered small rust stains. The stone is rather hard and cannot be crushed with the hand. Its overall character is not much different from the stone meteorite of Pultusk, in that, apart from the meteoritic and sulphuric iron, its main mass is whitish and yellowish, in which the individual shiny glass olivine granules contrast with the partly dark, partly light, sometimes opaque globules (chondrule spheres). Daubrée* compares it with the stone meteorites of Vouillé (May 13, 1831) and of Aumale in Algiers (August 25, 1865). Through this fall the tally of this type of most prevalent meteoritic stone, the chondrite, already above all others, is again increased by one and the impression of a unitary source of all these fragments from a once connected whole, which Meunier* also recently so strongly stressed, is significantly reinforced.

The exterior, fairly sharp-edged and angular form of the stones in these falls, which is only slightly obscured by the thin, superficial fusion crust, undoubtedly indicates debris of a larger, fragmented stone mass, which was formed from the destruction of an already completely finished solid substance. That this dismemberment partly took place during the fall through the Earth's atmosphere is implied by Smith's* observation that stated that a number of the stones looked as if they were freshly broken and that melting had only started to appear on these fractured surfaces. Incidentally, however, one detects neither rounding, nor filamentous expanding or cord-like twisting, striped formations, such as a soft, malleable body would obtain while moving along a cosmic orbit, or in flight during a volcano-like eruption, as one is obliged to suppose, like the lapilli and volcanic bombs. Even the inner, grainy debris-like nature without traces of glass- or lava-like particles, which cannot be brought into direct agreement with a molten liquid fire mass, decidedly rejects the notion of an eruption product in the style of our volcanoes. The external form and internal nature of this kind of meteorite does not speak, from a petrographic standpoint, in favor of the conjecture that these meteoritic stones were ejected from the Moon as creations of huge volcano-like eruptions. Also, equally implausible is their origin out of the host of shooting stars, because the times of the meteorite falls, insofar as the observations suffice, do not coincide with the times at which the shooting stars appear to fall at their maximum. What's more, this conjecture barely explains the very striking homogeneity in the composition of the stone meteorites. Hence the point of view is gaining more feasibility, that they are fragments from a celestial body, which through a destruction, engendered as a consequence of collision or due to a kind of pulverization from interior sources, whereby the centrifugal force of the excess of weight exceeds the original ability of attraction and the debris managed to come into the vicinity of Earth's pull, forced them to fall. Whether they are members of asteroid bodies or, as Meunier desires, a second satellite of the Earth reserves to be decided on by astronomical considerations, and is far from the point.

*) _Comptes rendus d. s. de l'Acad. d. sc_. 1875. p. 1175.

*) _Cours de géologie comparée_. Compare with: Tschermak, _The Formation of the Meteorites, Minutes of the Academy of Sciences in Vienna_. Volume 71, Section 2. 1875.

## Crust.

The available stone meteorite from Iowa is externally, apart from a minor man-made break, coated all over with a black, matte lustered, slightly rugose crust on average 0.05 m thick. This glass-like coating is coarsely cracked, fissured, and quite easily detaches from the main mass, whereby pieces of the latter remain adhered to it. In the interior of the stones one does not detect the presence of any veins or smooth surfaces similar to the crust, which for example so often pervade the stones of Pultusk.

This crust, based on closer examination, is comprised of a highly transparent, glass-like mass, which easily refracts the light and in numerous places encloses vesicles and porosities, but not in so singluar a manner, as I have observed in the crust substance from the stones of Pultusk. The crust is not completely spread out in a uniform way; at distinct locations one discerns, with a gentle rub, protruding meteoritic iron particles with a metallic gleam, on shifting it is very thin and tinted a little brighter, or else even thicker and at the same time usually shining even stronger. As thin sections indicate, finely crusted places match up with olivine grains intruding into the crust region, while a thicker fusion crust is formed where sulphuric iron occurs.

It is very challenging, due to the deep coloration, to obtain transparent crust in thin sections. It works out more easily to crush smaller chippings between two glass plates. They reveal thereupon a deep bottle-green up to a brownish-red color and behave in polarized light like an amorphous glass mass. These qualities validate the assumption that the crust was formed by the surface becoming molten as it flew through the Earth's atmosphere, in other words it represents a genuine fusion crust. For comparison, melting small fragments from the interior of the stone can be simply accomplished with very thin pieces at the fine points. The melted mass displays the full nature of the fusion crust, the same color and the same vesicles. The stone behaves peculiarly when one exposes it, without melting, to an intense red heat for a long time. In the process it takes on a dark, brownish-black color and shows distinct patches with a molten appearance when pierced. These are around the edges of the furbished pyrites, which have endured through the action of melting. If one produces thin sections of such annealed pieces, then one can see in them that the majority of the mass, of which the stone consists, has taken on a brown color due to the annealing, which as I have already emphasized earlier, makes for a very good indicator of olivine admixtures. The black edges around the pyrite particles are nearly opaque, colored deep brown, and refract light in a simple way, like the fusion crust. This darkened color, which the stone acquires with heating, is not found naturally in the stone beneath the fusion crust, demonstrating that the heat of melting restricted its action to an exceptionally thin layer of the surface, without transferring degress of heat towards deeper parts of the stone. Compared with this appearance, the well-done veining of some meteoritic stones from other places of recovery with very thin black little stripes is highly remarkable. In the stone of Pultusk, of which I had material at my disposal, I detected that these small veins likewise consisted of an amorphous glass substance. They also seem to be related to the black, nearly opaque marks which are found scattered in some meteoritic stones and presumably represent minor melt flows that generated mixtures, for instance pyrite.

*) _The Paleolithic. Eruptive Stones of the Fichtel Mountains_. 1874. p. 39.

Having said this, I do not think that the fine small veins mentioned above were a molten mass that infiltrated into the interior of the stones from the crust, but that the stone was broken or fissured in such places, and that these breaks were accessible to the atmosphere which performed the same melting process through friction, as on the surface itself.

## Stone Mass.

The main mass of the stone, which is rather hard and not friable with the fingers, is made of an aggreate of debris particles, which are agglutinated together without any intermediate substance, as neither a glass-like nor even a distinctive binding agent between the distinct granules can be observed. In great number in the main mass are found tiny little slivers of minerals with totally irregular contours, such as those resulting from the destruction of crystals or crystalline masses. Only very seldom does one see — in thin section — such little pieces, which are delimited by regular straight lines and could be held as small crystals or small regular cleavage objects (_k_ of [the lithograph table](https://cdn.solaranamnesis.com/Gumbel/Iowa/Fig-1.png)). To this is added irregular, angular granules that can be quite safely identified as olivine by their glassy luster and their color (_o_), whitish plaster of an opaque substance, small granules of lead-grey, meteoritic iron with metallic luster (_f_), tombac yellow little heaps of sulphuric iron in many cases perforated (_s_), the fine granules of which rarely account for the inferred mass and finally those small, rounded, almost dark-, almost light-colored globules (spheroidal chondrules _c_), which impress upon the stone the character of [Gustav] Rose's chondrite. Sparsely positioned or concentrated into tiny clusters, there are utterly fine, black dust particles without a metallic luster (_ch_), which either are associated with chrome iron or a carbonaceous substance, since they resist all action of acids.

[The image included in the lithograph table](https://cdn.solaranamnesis.com/Gumbel/Iowa/Fig-1.png) shows the sort of distribution of these constituent minerals in a thin section at 25 times magnification.

Explanation of the Annotations of the Lithograph  
_o_ Olivine,  
_a_ Augite piece,  
_f_ Meteoritic iron,  
_s_ Sulphuric iron,  
_ch_ Chrome iron,  
_k_ Piece with well-behaved crystal contours,  
_io_ Olivine granule in meteoritic iron,  
_g_ Reddish garnet-like inclusion,  
_c_ Spheroidal chondrules, namely:  
_cc_ with concentric structure,  
_sc_ with fibrous structure,  
_fc_ with radial structure,  
_kc_ with granular structure,  
_oc_ consisting of olivine,  
_dc_ opaque finely granulated globules.

A peculiar occurrence with practically all the constituent minerals, excluding the metallic ones, is demonstrated by the existence of an astonishing quantity of thin and very fine cracks that permeate individual pieces. With some constituent minerals, a certain regularity is seen in the direction of these unending fissures due to a parallel progression of the cracks, which probably are related to the cleavage direction of the relevant minerals. But at the same time, alongside these more regular cracks emerge others that cross them at right angles or obliquely and create a vertiable network of breaks, so that even otherwise clear mineral pieces show up clouded. They must be viewed as a sign of destruction incurred by impact, pressure, or rapid changes of temperature.

Due to this cracked condition of most of the constituent minerals, the comprehensive inner nature is often obscured, so that it is but rarely in individual larger particles that what seem to be common vesicles can be discerned — only so far as my observations suffice — devoid of fluid inclusions. Utterly fine, dust-like mixtures are also frequently present in the otherwise clear mineral particles, while actual microliths seem to be missing.

As far as the mineralogical nature of the distinct constituent minerals is concerned, a great number of them cannot be associated with simple minerals, but rather represent stone fragments composed of a more or less regular intergrowth of different minerals.

Olivine undoubtedly takes first place among the simple mineral parts. Not only in the exterior appearance, the color, the peculiar sheen pointed out on lots of the larger granules, and the tiny crystal fragments of olivine, but also this stipulation finds confirmation in the decomposition of these particles by hydrochloric acid, in the turning-brown through annealing, and in the motley play of colors with the application of polarized light in thin sections. Much of the finely granulated, fissured fragments in the figure belong to olivine (_o_), as well as many of the crystal-like regularly defined slivers and even a number of the spherical depositions turn out to be reliably identified as olivine. Even more, olivine pieces are also noticeable in the fine powder-like intermediate mass, which appears to join the constituent larger fragments, as can be detected during the turning-brown of annealing. Most curiously, the olivine substance in some panel-like striated globules (_sc_ in the figure) with a white, feather-like straight-grained substance, such as occurs in the radiating fibrous globules, are intergrown in a lamellar entangling like a kind of graphic granite. The narrow, intersecting depositional little olivine lamellae come out very clearly after the annealing due to their dark brown coloration. That they are associated with an olivine substance is revealed through treatment with hydrochloric acid, whereby they are corroded, though many intermediate lamellae remain unaltered.

I was not able to detect feldspathic component parts with certainty, even though individual water-clear small needles exhibit the peculiar pale yellow and blue colors, so characteristic of feldspar, and even though I, with all certainty, observed them in great quantity in the meteorite of L'Aigle (fell on April 26, 1803), which incorporated numerous little feldspar needles in the stone debris. The chemical analysis also confirms that at any rate feldspathic components are only contributing to the composition in a most minor way.

If one treats quite a lot of fine powder with hydrochloric acid in heat for a long time, a large part of the stone mass — of the olivine portion — separates into a slimier silicic acid without actually forming a gel. In the remains released by boiling silicic acid, one can now spot very numerous, often water-clear, little pieces with parallel striations, alongside cloudy, powdery-grained residues, most of which originate from shattered globules. The fine, black granules, which are deposited here and there in groups, have also been left undissolved, while, along with olivine, the meteoritic and sulphuric iron have gone into solution. The more or less water-clear small pieces, the ones that remained undissolved, turn out to be birefringent and exhibit the most beautiful aggregate colors, and if the rest is treated still further with hydrofluoric acid, it completely breaks down into fine black granules, which are associated with chrome iron or a carbonaceous substance.

...
